# notes
Tumbling Into Queer Utopias and Vortexes: Experiences of LGBTQ Social Media Users on Tumblr
Andre Cavalcante
Media Studies and Women, Gender, and Sexuality, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA

KEYWORDS
Social media; queer; Tumblr; utopia; queer youth












“Tumblr is the whirlpool for the queer and gender vortex,” explained Kayden, a 21-year-old Filipino American trans college student. Kayden is a participant in my current study on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) youth’s experiences of identity, politics, and community in contemporary media culture. During our first interview, he enthusiastically talked about Tumblr, a microblogging and social networking site popular among young people—in particular, young queer people. Kayden talked at length about the ways in which the platform allowed him to dive deeply into a space that was, as he said, “all about gender and sexuality. You can lose yourself in there.” Venturing into what he called the “queer vortex” on Tumblr was a central and profoundly meaningful component of his everyday life. As a trans man who had recently begun to transition, Kayden said he needed to feel surrounded and completely immersed in queer discourse, progressive politics, transgender style, gay fandom, and, of course, funny memes. Tumblr provided these for him.
Kayden was not the only participant to discuss Tumblr in these terms. Many of the LGBTQ young people in my study described Tumblr as a queer “bubble,” a “black hole,” a place where you can get “sucked in” and “fall into.” They talked about this dynamic in both positive and negative ways. On the one hand, they extolled Tumblr’s advantages and its queer world-making

CONTACT Andre Cavalcante	amc7jc@virginia.edu	Media Studies and Women, Gender, and Sexuality, University of Virginia, 225 Wilson Hall, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA.
© 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
 

potential, but, on the other, they acknowledged its significant risks and shortcomings. In this article, I examine both sides of Tumblr. I argue that the platform simultaneously generates the specter of a “queer utopia” (Muñoz, 2009)—a space where queer potential flourishes, where new more expansive ways to think about the future materialize—and queer “vortex- tuality” (Whannel, 2010)—an experience of being sucked into an online black hole with severe limitations. In contextualizing this argument, I first histor- icize Tumblr as a queer space. I suggest it shares much in common with its historical predecessors—such as the gay bar or the gayborhood—but also brings something new to LGBTQ articulations of self, space, and commu- nication. Then I explore why Tumblr in particular—as opposed to Facebook or Twitter, for example—has become a center of online queerness. Finally, I examine how Tumblr affords users a sense of political agency, possibility, community, and hope (the utopic). At the same time, I interrogate how Tumblr creates a kind of vortex for its users defined by short periods of intense social interactions that do not sustain over time, information bubbles, and dark and potentially harmful niche communities. Crucially, the user experience on the site underscores the profound vulnerability of queer individuals and communities in digital, corporatized space.
This article is informed by approximately one year of fieldwork examining LGBTQ youth, their use of digital media, and experiences of belonging, possibility, and identity. Methodologically, I conducted 27 individual, in- depth interviews, four focus groups, and participant observation on Tumblr and at LGBTQ public events. Interviews allowed me to acquire depth and texture of experience, whereas focus groups stimulated a conversational exchange between young LGBTQ-identifying people. All study participants are between the ages of 18 and 28 and currently live in the American South. Almost all are college students or former college students, since southern universities served as primary—although not the only—sites for participant recruitment. As a result, participants are generally well educated and con- versant in social justice issues. In this article, I draw heavily on their voices and experiences to ground the complex relationship between technology and queerness.
To be clear, I use queer here as an umbrella term to discuss nonnormative forms (identities, spaces, practices, expressions, etc.) of gender and sexuality. Following Halperin (1995), I understand queerness as a “positionality vis-à- vis the normative,” something that exists outside of or in opposition to a heteronormative framework (p. 62). In this way, queer identities include, but are not limited to, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, nonbinary, pansexual, and asexual identities. Although the category queer materializes in the West at the end of the 20th century within the discourses of a more radical sexual politics, in this article I use it to discuss a shared experience of margin- alization along the lines of sexuality and gender across historical time.
 

Historic transformations, queer space, and social media
To understand LGBTQ youth’s engagement with Tumblr, it is necessary to explore the changing character of public space generally, and queer space in particular. While writing queer histories is always fraught, a practice of summoning “queer fictions of the past” (Bravmann, 1997, p. 99) to create a neat and tidy story of the “community,” in this section I construct a brief and partial historical account of queer space.
In the late 19th and early 20th century, LGBTQ people gathered in specific spaces spread across the city that were culturally coded as queer. Certain bars, restaurants, coffee shops, streets, parks, theaters, and bathrooms served as social hubs for queer men and women. For many, these public sites offered the only opportunities for communication, companionship, and sex (Chauncey, 1994). Drag balls and private parties also fostered queer interac- tion. During New York City’s Harlem Renaissance, for example, house parties—also known as “rent parties” where hosts would charge admission to cover their rent for the month—offered relatively safe and discreet spaces for queer people to gather (Garber, 1989). Ghaziani (2014) referred to this historical moment as the “closet era” (p. 13), a time when gay spaces were precarious projects scattered across urban environments.
As many scholars have argued, World War II was the engine that sig- nificantly altered the nature of gay space and community in the United States, helping to consolidate the scattered queer landscape (Bronski, 2011; Chauncey, 1994; D’Emilio, 1983; Faderman, 1991; Kennedy & Davis, 1993). The war effort brought men and women from all over the country together in close homosocial environments, which allowed for sexual experimentation and individuation. After the war, many gays and lesbians settled in coastal cities and built gay enclaves or “gayborhoods,” a new and more consolidated formation of queer space. At this time, the gay and mainstream press framed cities such as San Francisco and New York, for example, as gay meccas,urban spaces that welcomed sexual non-normativity and offered community (Meeker, 2005). This publicity brought queer migrants looking for a better life in urban space. Moreover, the gay liberation movement and the uprising at the Stonewall Inn in New York City in 1969 encouraged public affirmation of one’s queerness and further marked certain urban centers as sites of queer sociality and political mobilization. As Weston (1995) argued, “the gay imaginary is spatialized … the result is a sexual geography in which the city represents a beacon of tolerance and gay community” (p. 262).
Gayborhoods swelled during the “the Great Gay Migration” (Weston, 1995, p. 255) of the 1970s and 1980s as gays and lesbians made their pilgrimage to settle down in gay-friendly urban locales across the United States. Importantly, gayborhoods housed many historic gay institutions such as bars, bookstores, sex shops, social service organizations, political advocacy
 

groups, and social clubs. These locations were also synonymous with sex and safety (Hanhardt, 2013), precious commodities for queer people who were systematically marginalized, criminalized, and targeted by violence. This is not to suggest that gayborhoods were queer utopias. Residents were still at risk for violence, and gayborhoods evidenced their own internal racial, class, and cultural hierarchies.
Yet since the 1990s, gayborhoods have become increasingly gentrified and, as Doan (2015) argued, threatened by “neo-liberal planning interventions to cleanse neighborhoods and make them safe for capital investment” (p. 5). It appears that the gayborhood is weakening as a queer center of gravity. The historic LGBTQ institutions that once thrived there are relocating, unable to afford skyrocketing rents. Residents, too, are priced out of the market and moving out, making way for the young, heterosexual families moving in. These transformations have led queer scholars such as Ghaziani (2014) to question “whether the preservation of a minority group’s way of life—it’s culture essentially—requires a spatial component. Can queer cultures, com- munities, and identities persist in the absence of gayborhoods?” (p. 82, original emphasis).
Apart from the changing landscape of American gayborhoods, other social, cultural, and political shifts are refashioning queer culture, space, and community in fundamental ways. Public opinion has become more favorable with respect to homosexuality (Brown, 2017), and many LGBTQ people are migrating out of the cities and into the suburbs. In some more privileged gay communities, a post-gay sensibility has surfaced, which no longer perceives sexuality as the organizing master identity (Walters, 2014). Sexuality has become simply a marker of one’s sexual preference, not a site around which to politically and socially organize. Participation in historically queer institutions has decreased, and 41% of LGBTQ Americans believe these institutions will become less important as queer individuals are increasingly integrated into society (Brown, 2017). Gay clubs and bars are closing at an alarming rate (Rosser, West, & Weinmeyer, 2008), while those that manage to stay in business are increasingly hailing straight patrons to survive in a competitive marketplace. As with gay bars, media organizations that pre- viously catered exclusively to the gay community have taken to the practice of “dual casting” (Sender, 2007, p. 302), marketing to both gay and straight audiences alike with content meant to appeal across demographics. Furthermore, the rise of the Internet and mobile communications technolo- gies has created new platforms for LGBTQ individuals and communities to meet and communicate. Mobile dating apps such as Grindr, Tinder, and HER allow queer individuals to locate each other for companionship and sex within heterosexual space.
Nevertheless, even as these historic transformations unfold, queer space is not entirely smothered. Visser (2015) argued that rather than discerning
 

these changes through a paradigm of displacement or the destruction of queer space writ large, there is an emergent pattern of replacement, or the development of newer forms of queer space across the globe. Ghaziani (2014) perceived a trend toward the systematic construction of “queer cultural archipelagos” (p. 137), decidedly queer spaces that are smaller and more flexible than, for example, traditional gayborhoods. Whereas queer cultural archipelagos lack the kind of rich history that defines places such as San Francisco’s Castro District, they nevertheless emerge as “hotbeds of queer lives, cultures, and communities, off the beaten path” (p. 141).
In establishing these new cultural archipelagos, LGBTQ people are moving into newer parts of big cities, into smaller cities, and even into the suburbs. Since the 1990s, they have also been establishing hotbeds of queerness in cyberspace. Indeed, queer individuals and communities were some of the first digital pioneers, venturing onto the Web in its early days to find like- minded others (Gross, 2003). The Web seemed like an optimal site for community building given the limited and scattered options available in the physical world. In the past 15 years, social media in particular have afforded fertile ground for queer cultural archipelagos to develop. These sites have become fully woven into the contemporary queer experience, playing a critical role in the everyday lives of LGBTQ people.
Notably, social media perform various sociopolitical and cultural functions for queer individuals and communities. They enable traditional learning (searching for information about LGBTQ issues to educate one’s self), social learning (securing models of collective identity and behavior by observing others online), experiential learning (participating in social encounters and queer enculturation), and teaching (sharing LGBTQ-related information with others; Fox & Ralston, 2016). Social media platforms also now serve many functions of the gay bar, helping individuals “accumulate sexual networks” (Gudelunas, 2012, p. 360) and find partners for friendship, romance, and sex with a sense of safety, control, and ease (Miller, 2015).
Social networking sites have also emerged as vehicles for queer youth to practice intimate storytelling, as they digitally narrate their identities and lives for likeminded audiences (De Ridder & Van Bauwel, 2015). The practice of storytelling is crucial for young LGBTQ people—who often face severe marginalization in everyday life—because it facilitates the individual and collective construction of identity, pride, and, belonging (Alexander & Losh, 2010; Vivienne & Burgess, 2012). Social media also give rise to new queer publics and counterpublics, or those organized collectivities that stand in opposition to dominant society and the status quo (Warner, 2002). Studies focusing on transgender (Cavalcante, 2016) and asexual (Renninger, 2015) counterpublics online show how these spaces create vibrant subcultural exchange and opportunities for affirmative (and anonymous) communica- tion. Online counterpublics offer “experiences of identity, belonging, and
 

ideological affiliation,” but even more “they help to make the management of everyday life possible” for queer people (Cavalcante, 2016, p. 118).
Finally, the queer cultural archipelagos that surface on social media serve as easily accessible repositories for collective memory. Queer people have historically lacked those “institutions for common memory and generational transmission around which straight culture is built” (Warner, 1999, p. 51). In filling this void, social media provide space for memory making, for archiv- ing non-normative sexual knowledge and history. For example, Selvick (2014) found that the Tumblr page “Fuck Yeah Androgyny,” a space for those who do not fit into the male/female binary, actively constructs a much- needed historic archive of androgynous imagery. The archive is significant for the ways it instantiates androgyny in the historical record and commu- nicates its ontological legitimacy to queer youth. But what makes pages such as “Fuck Yeah Androgyny” flourish on Tumblr in particular? In other words, why has Tumblr become a dominant cultural archipelago for queer youth?

The queer world of Tumblr
Across the current social media landscape, Tumblr is widely understood, according to the participants in my study, as the queer standard-bearer. As one participant noted during an interview, “There’s this joke about Tumblr that everyone is queer, or at least some sort of ‘social justice warrior.’ And it’s kind of true.” Current research has confirmed that Tumblr “has been espe- cially revealing of collective online queer trans creativity, particularly around sexual expression, everyday coalitional politics, and genderqueer culture” (Fink & Miller, 2014, p. 613). There are a variety of reasons why Tumblr has become a social and cultural magnet for LGBTQ youth.
There is a touch of queerness to Tumblr’s origin story and the logic behind its architecture. As a teenager, Tumblr’s founder, David Karp, surfed the Web and became increasingly frustrated by the limitations of available blog- ging platforms, finding offerings by Wordpress, LiveJournal, and Blogger clunky, difficult to start, and heavily text-based (Welch, 2011). When he launched Tumblr in 2007, Karp devoted his company to “blogging made easy” (its tagline), wanting to create a space for simple, short, multimedia expression (Cheshire, 2012). In the beginning, the site attracted an eclectic— even queer—mix of users. The first Tumblr blogs focused primarily on media and technology, the arts and creative expression, and pornography and erotica (Alfonso, 2013; Cheshire, 2012).
The site was fundamentally devoted to self-expression and characterized by an ethos of permissiveness. “I’m not into moderating this stuff,” Karp said in 2012, commenting on the site’s wealth of pornographic content. “Tumblr’s an excellent platform for porn, which I don’t personally have any moral opposition to” (Cheshire, 2012). Soon after its arrival, Tumblr gained a
 

reputation for providing digital space to society’s mainstream, its fringe, and everything in between. Importantly, unlike Facebook, Tumblr did not require a real name to sign up. Facebook actively enforces an “authentic” name policy in which users must use their “real” name, one verifiable by official documents. This policy conflicts with the everyday life circumstances of, for example, drag performers and transgender individuals who might adopt multiple and fluid identities.
By contrast, Tumblr opened the door for expressing multiple, queer selves. Users can have more than one page. The site encourages what boyd (2014) called a “crafted identity” (p. 41), one that is characteristically patchwork, dynamic, and evolving. Its design permits users to integrate text, photos, links, and video on their pages, allowing for a multimedia expression of self. Tumblr allows young LGBTQ users to mix and match visual imagery, snippets of popular culture, poetry, and so on to express an emergent identity in a way that sites such as Facebook and Twitter simply do not allow. These characteristics are what drew Priya, a White lesbian in her first year of college, to the platform. She explained, “When I was a junior in high school, I made a Tumblr, and then through Tumblr, I was like, “Oh wow, there’s so many gay people. This is fantastic.” When asked why she thought there were so many gay people on Tumblr, she replied:

They’re everywhere because I think gay itself is alternative, and I feel like Tumblr itself is a very alternative platform, a very alternative social media experience, because there are pictures, you can do quotes, you can do all this stuff, and they’re not really going to censor you. You can do whatever and there’s a lot of openness. I mean they allow porn on there. I don’t know. It’s very queer.

Furthermore, there is a diversity of queer identities represented on Tumblr not seen in other digital spaces, because young people are creating deeply intersectional identities in new ways on the platform. In addition to inter- sections of race and class, Tumblr hosts numerous pages about what it means to be queer and “demisexual” (feeling sexual attraction to someone only if there is a strong emotional connection); queer and “pansexual” (feeling sexual attraction toward individuals along the gender spectrum, including those who are trans, nonbinary, and gender nonconforming); queer and “polyamorous” (desiring multiple sexual relationships at once); and queer and “neurodivergent” (a non-pathological way of describing someone with an atypical neurological condition or disability). Tumblr pages about these identities underscore the intersectional nature of queerness and take care to celebrate and affirm difference.
Another reason that Tumblr has become a queer digital center is its reblog feature. Tumblr is a community where sharing and spreading content that is not your own is expected. This capability is especially useful for young LGBTQ people who may not be out of the closet and who are testing the
 

waters of identity. They may not be comfortable expressing themselves with original content and thus can reblog and share others’ posts. As one parti- cipant explained of her use of Tumblr, “I know I didn’t post a lot of my own things being like, ‘Oh, today was like this and I’m bi.’ I wasn’t super-duper open with it. I just reblogged what other people said about it and was like, ‘Oh, I agree with this,’ reblog.”
Tumblr’s communicative structure also facilitates social exchange in ways that are safer and less risky for LGBTQ users than other Web sites. As mentioned above, users can use nicknames, allowing them to interact with others under a cloak of privacy and anonymity. Using nicknames, Tumblr users can interact online without the threat of being “outed” or the possibility of “outing” themselves. But even more, Tumblr is a safer and less risky space for LGBTQ youth because the site privileges posts, not comments. The comments that users write on posts can be seen and tracked, but they are not automatically visible. To see the comments, one has to actively look for them. This offers another layer of protection to people communicating on the site. Moreover, it disincentivizes users from posting homophobic or transphobic comments. The negative comments would have little impact because most users would not see them. At the same time, Tumblr allows individuals to gradually build social networks of likeminded people. Authors of original posts can be found easily and the site creates a searchable archive of topics through hashtags and search functions. Thus Tumblr’s communi- cative structure allows users to easily find LGBTQ people, progressively build a social network, and search for LGBTQ topics without revealing their “real” identity.
Finally, Tumblr has become a dominant cultural archipelago for queer young people today by virtue of its timing. As the participants in my study were coming of age, so was the digital platform. Both grew up and matured in parallel. Damian, a Latino gay male, perhaps explained it best:
It’s a community of people who grew up together and who did not know what we we’re dealing with. We grew up together with this love of media and nerds. We all found out about Tumblr together and migrated there at the same time. We met and acknowledged each other’s queerness and now we’re growing up together. We flowered our identities together. And we’re still learning together. Little by little, Tumblr expanded and we expanded with it.

Tumblr provided a customizable and accommodating space to queer young people such as Damian at exactly the time they needed it most: as they were testing their identities, hungry for a sense of belonging. Note how many times he used the word “together.” Damian and his cohorts’ experi- ences on the platform not only allowed them to burrow deep into queer content together as a group, but also opened up new worlds. Damian continued, “It started out with finding out you were ‘the gay sibling’ and
 

then there was this ripple effect and now all these other doors are opening and you’re learning about intersectionality and racism and queer people of color and representation and disabled queer people and people who are along the gender spectrum. It’s like a Fibonacci sequence that starts out small and expands exponentially.” Tumblr’s queer world, it turns out, is not necessarily a single-issue information environment, but an intersectional space that rapidly expands queer youth’s social and political imaginary. In this way, I argue that it harbors utopic potential.


Tumblr’s queer utopic
According to the participants in my study, Tumblr is a formation of queer space that brings the utopic into view. According to Sargent (2010), “all utopias ask questions” and are characterized by a kind of “social dreaming,” by a desire for something better, for personal or societal transformation (p. 5). Utopias are motivated by a sort of refusal, “the refusal to accept that living beyond the present is delusional, the refusal to take at face value current judgments of the good, or claims that there is no alternative” (Levitas, 2007, p. 294).
Tumblr generates a specific kind of utopia, one that is both digital and queer. Dickel and Schrape (2017) wrote that digital utopias are unique in that they presume “behavioral changes or a new political order are not sufficient to bring about social change. Instead, new media technologies are viewed as instruments for bringing about the presumed transition” (p. 53). In this way, Tumblr serves as a “catalyst” and a “stepping stone to universal future hopes arising in the course of criticism of current conditions” (p. 53). Tumblr also creates a queer utopia. According to Muñoz (2009), LGBTQ individuals are too often “cast as hopeless in a world without utopia” (p. 98). Their everyday lives are devoid of optimism and lack the specter of something more, something with greater freedom. What is urgently needed, Muñoz (2009) argued, is “a space outside of heteronormativity … [that] permits us to conceptualize new worlds … offers us a critique of the present, of what is, by casting a picture of what can and perhaps will be” (p. 35, original emphasis). Furthermore, Jones (2013) argued that queer utopias may “not necessarily allow for complete emancipation or even happiness, but are suggestive of the potentiality of the future; they give hope” (p. 3). Hope is the fuel that keeps the utopic fire burning.
Tumblr’s queer utopic is energized largely by users’ experiences of margin-
alization in their everyday lives and their hope and desire for something better. Erin, an 18-year-old bisexual woman who attends a southern uni- versity, explained:
You can totally fall into Tumblr. You can just be wrapped up in it for hours and hours just because it’s such a diverse amount of things, and it’s always there on
 

your phone. People I think are just drawn to it because of how accepting it is. It’s like, ‘Just be open with who you are.’ You see all these people being open about their sexuality, which we weren’t as used to growing up in high school. Our high school was oppressively straight. You needed an escape from it. So, I feel like you can totally fall into it and be in the void for however long.
For Erin, Tumblr’s openness, its accommodation of diverse identities and sexualities, and encouragement of self-expression drew her in. Tumblr was a welcome retreat from the stifling, suffocating, and “oppressively straight” high school she attended. Erin’s experience illustrates the ways in which queer utopias furnish “autonomous spaces in which to breathe” (Jones, 2013, p. 3).
Tumblr’s digital, queer utopia also generated political awareness and engagement, along with positive affect for the participants in my study. This was the case for Jesse, a White 22-year-old femme genderfluid person who identifies as pansexual. Jesse is incredibly active on Tumblr and started using the site when she was in high school.
When I was in high school, people started leaving LiveJournal for Tumblr. Tumblr had been created in 2007 and became a huge part of my life. That summer, I went to a precollege program to get college credit for art stuff, because at that time, I thought I was going into art. So, there I met all these people who were cool art student teenagers, who were all talking about Tumblr all the time, and I was like, “Oh, I made the right call. That’s the place to be, obviously, if all these super cool art student people are there.”
As Jesse began using Tumblr more frequently, she soon encountered its queer community. “There were just so many cool, alternative, queer teen- agers on Tumblr that I was meeting. From there, I just started following more and more Tumblrs that dealt with queer issues, political issues.” Jesse credited Tumblr with awakening her political consciousness. For example, after reading LGBTQ-themed blogs and learning what she called “the lan- guage of social justice,” she joined the National Center for Transgender Equality and participated in its online political campaigns. In college, she decided to major in Women, Gender, and Sexuality, volunteered at the Women’s Center, and participated in an LGBTQ speaker’s bureau giving talks across campus about queer identities and issues.
Tumblr also helped sustain Jesse’s activism by providing her with what she called a “happy place” that held the promise of something better. “It’s the way things should be,” Jesse said. “I highly regulate who I am following and who knows what about everything on there because that’s a space that I want to go to have a nice time. I’m so intense about it that I have all these extensions downloaded. I can’t use Tumblr without my extensions because everything has to be exactly the way I set it up. I blacklist tags, I whitelist tags.” Blacklisting a tag blocks any content with that tag from showing up on users’ feeds on their dashboards. Whitelisting a tag ensures that content with
 

that tag shows up on a user’s dashboard feed. As Jesse explained these extensions to the focus group, one participant asked her if in regulating her Tumblr feed so extensively she became out of touch with “the sucky real world.” Without hesitation, Jesse responded, “I don’t need reminders of the world sucking! I am fully, completely aware of that. What I need is a queer space I can go to where it’s good.” For Jesse, this good place provided a model of what could be, inspiring and sustaining her social justice efforts. Indeed, sustaining activists and keeping their hope for a better future alive is one of the critical functions of queer utopias (Steele, 2013).
Within the utopic spaces that Tumblr opened up to participants like Jesse, common sense and taken-for-granted knowledge were reoriented. Queerness moved from the periphery to the center and demanded not only recognition but also comprehension. Participants in Tumblr’s queer utopic are expected to understand—or at least attempt to understand—the various and emerging taxonomies of sexual and gender variance. Hayden, a White trans woman approaching her final year of college, explained: “It’s interesting on Facebook looking at comments and stuff, people talking about transgender people without referencing their human status. Have you noticed that? It’s like, ‘Oh I know a transgender.’ Or like ‘the transgenders.’ We’re just like a word. Some people are like ‘I’m not trans phobic, I know a trans.’ That would not happen on my Tumblr! My human status is just obvious.” She continued, “People on there [on Tumblr] get it. And if they can, everyone else should.” This attitude, one cultivated on Tumblr, has caused Hayden to increasingly talk back to injustices she sees on other social media platforms. “I actually just can’t stay silent anymore when I see that [transgender dehumanization] on my friends’ [Facebook] pages. I know I piss people off, but whatever.”
Similarly, Jordan, a White gender non-conforming gay man who recently
was graduated from college, cherishes what he called Tumblr’s “queer bub- ble.” During our interview, he offered the following in an almost confession- like tone:

I have to say, I downright adore “the queer bubble.” I know it’s probably not popular to say. But I need to have conversations with other people who are on the same wavelength. I need to talk about things in a reasonable way without the freak- outs and stupidity from the last people on earth who should be contributing to the conversation. I honestly don’t have the energy to defend every single obviously common sense thing I say … I also don’t have to explain what being demisexual means, which is a huge relief.

Jordan explained that in his everyday life he typically does not tell others he is gay and demisexual because over and again he has to explain what demisexual means. This repeated exercise in self-definition is frustrating. Yet on Tumblr his demisexual identity is merely common sense.
 

Juniper, a Black pansexual woman in her last year of college, also com- mented that Tumblr facilitates a collaborative construction (and contestation of) queer common sense.
Living in the South, there were a lot of White gay men at my high school. But no queer Black folk. Finding a home on Tumblr made me feel better because I found other queer people of color … There is an open platform for constructive criticism in all areas around intersectionality and race and queerness and it is a safe space to have these conversations. It’s like you can say I see what you’re saying but it’s problematic because of X, Y, and Z. And you can have that not met with hostility. No screaming, no violence, no foolishness. Everyone’s on the same page… It’s not that we all always agree, but we all at least try to learn and do better.
Juniper also discussed how on Tumblr her pansexual and polyamorous identities required little to no explanation. In Tumblr’s queer utopic, these identities are ordinary. As Juniper noted, “Listen, almost everyone on my Tumblr knows about pansexuality. I don’t need to explain it. I also don’t need to defend [accentuates this word loudly] that I am poly either. People just get it.”
Crucially, Juniper brought the expectation that others “get” queer identi- ties with her into the everyday world. In college, she noticed a disconnection between her queer Tumblr community and the LGBTQ student group she attends with respect to knowledge about emerging non-normative sexual and gender identities. As a result, she decided to “do the work. You have to do the work.” For Juniper, “doing the work” meant leading a workshop on emerging queer identities with her LGBTQ student group. “We talked about pansexuality, being poly, being nonbinary, being ace [asexual], and then of course all of the intersections with those identities.” The workshop was a success, and it motivated Juniper, who is also a resident advisor, to give the same talk in her dorm to an audience of both LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ identifying people. Notably, Juniper put what she learned from Tumblr’s queer utopic into practice.
As the stories of the participants in my study reveal, Tumblr can provide a kind of queer utopia that sustains LGBTQ users’ sense of self, encourages them to talk back, and alters what they expect from the people and institu- tions they encounter in everyday life. Tumblr facilitates belonging and motivates users to think differently and more expansively, and to take socio- political action in their local communities. These actions may not necessarily be grand political gestures or the kind of collective mobilizations that start movements. But they affirm and legitimate queer difference, opposing the kinds of assimilationist logics that encourage queerness to hide or blend in. Indeed, the vision of queer utopia that Tumblr offers is, as Muñoz (2009) argued, “an anticipatory illumination of a queer world, a sign of an actually existing queer reality, a kernel of political possibility within a stultifying heterosexual present” (p. 49).
 

Tumbling into the queer vortex
Even as Tumblr harbors affirmative and empowering utopic elements, it also creates a kind of vortex with significant risks and limitations. In his study of the news coverage of the 2005 Michael Jackson court case and its verdict, Whannel (2010) employed the term vortextuality (p. 68) to describe how the story dominated attention across media platforms, resulting in a temporary media frenzy. The court case acted as a massive gravitational center, a vortex, that effectively pulled public attention inward in an almost totalizing fashion. Its coverage drowned out most other news stories. Whannel (2010) described this media process as one defined by “a dynamic spiraling around a powerful center” (p. 68). In historically situating the phenomenon, Whannel (2010) argued that vortextuality is a function of modernity and “has its roots in the acceleration of social processes that begun with industrialization” (p. 67). In particular, two historic transformations have facilitated the vortextual effect: (1) the expansion of the media industries, the multiplication of media outlets, and the proliferation of media content; and (2) the increased quantity and velocity of information available in everyday life. In positioning vortextuality as a modern phenomenon, Whannel is not suggesting that news media have never been preoccupied with certain stories in the past. Certainly they have. Yet in the contemporary, digital, and networked era, the scope, rate, and intensity of the coverage is amplified to such an effect that they create an informational vortex.
Whereas Whannel developed his theory of vortextuality to describe an industrial news practice, I argue that the concept has equal theoretical relevance with respect to media audiences and users. As with the news industries, media users themselves engage in vortextuality, spiraling their focus around a powerful media center. In the context of media audiences, vortextuality is a process of intense user engagement with media for a delimited amount of time. It is the experience of being sucked in, of falling into a mediated black hole. Although media users do not entirely drown out other sources of information, the attention paid to alternative voices in the media landscape is reduced. As with its industrial counterpart, audience vortextuality is a specifically contemporary phenomenon. It is facilitated by the character of digital social media such as Tumblr: their portability, net- worked structure, customizability, and capacity to allow users to be perpe- tually connected to technology and to each other across space and time.
For LGBTQ users in particular, Tumblr generates a queer vortex. Indeed, Tumblr becomes queerer as they use it. Its queerness self-perpetuates in the way its algorithm curates feeds, makes certain posts visible, and recommends blogs to users. As Tomo explained:
When I first started Tumblr, I had almost an equal division between LGBT stuff and just my personal enjoyment of games stuff. The LGBT stuff has now taken over at this point. Every so often I’ll see something about my games stuff but it’s
 

not as much as an equal divide for me anymore. I think that’s over the years because new things keep popping up for LGBT stuff I keep following it and then it just becomes an unequal scale. So, it’s really hard after a while, once you find a space on Tumblr, it’s hard to expand out. Your newsfeed also recommends blogs to you about stuff you’re already interested in. Also, generally your feed is from the people that you follow. So, if you only follow five people, and those people are queer, your newsfeed is always gonna be from those five people and it’s gonna be hella queer.
Whereas this “hella queer” space hints at the utopic, as I have explored above, it also harbors inherent risks, limitations, and liabilities. While it is beyond the scope of this article to examine them all, in what follows I consider four: the temporary nature of social engagement Tumblr affords, the potential information bubble that it creates, the dark underbelly of its communities, and the increasing corporatization of the site.
As the participants in my study routinely expressed, encounters with Tumblr’s queer world were so deeply intense and at times all-consuming that they felt inside a vortex. But as Whannel (2010) maintained, this kind of concentrated attention and constant usage that defines vortextuality can only be short-lived. The vortextual moment is generally unsustainable and will “end as abruptly as [it began]” (Whannel, 2010, p. 67). “The initial physical forces that trigger the effect,” Whannel (2010) argued, “cease to be strong enough to sustain it” (p. 67). Almost all the participants in my study who talked about Tumblr displayed this pattern: a hotly committed period of use followed by a cooling-off stage. Casey, a 20-year-old White, genderqueer lesbian who goes to college in a southern university, signed up on Tumblr when she was a junior in high school. She was drawn to the site because:
You can really purge your mind on there. I was very, very into it when I first started using it because I found all of this queer stuff and I was like, ‘Wow, this is amazing.’ I also went through this really, really tough breakup, and I was on it a lot then as well.” But the time and energy she first invested into the site was untenable. Her use soon became cyclical. “Eventually I dropped off. I didn’t use it that much. But then before college, I started back up on it because it was a good outlet. But once college picked up, I dropped off because classes and school and stuff.
Jess, a White bisexual woman in her third year of college, had a similar experience:
Senior year in high school I made a Tumblr. I was like kind of obsessed with Tumblr. I came a little bit late to it, because like people were talking about it my freshman year and I didn’t get it until senior year, but I was really into it for like all of senior year and then into like freshman year of college. I just found it useful. I don’t really know why I stopped using it so much. I just kind of stopped checking it because it was less applicable to day-to-day life I think. At least at college, you have to have a Facebook to like do anything, so I think I just ended up spending a lot more time there.
 

For both Jess and Casey, their use of Tumblr decreased as the demands of college intensified and as the norms of their social environment changed. The same was true for Lucas, a gay Latino man in his second year of college, but he also believed the site began to offer diminishing returns.
It just like began to lose some of its utility in college, and especially like by the end of my first semester, I really had stopped using it so much, because of time, just I’m busy in college. But also, I felt like I was learning less on Tumblr and more in real life. Like going to the LGBT student club and all these other clubs that I was involved in that focused around social justice. I think it just began to be less relevant. Tumblr also started to feel a bit young. Everyone on there is young and really passionate. I think I might have outgrown it maybe.
Indeed, Tumblr users are young. According to Statista (2016), a market research company, as of 2016, 25.7% of users were between 18 and 24 years old.
Given the intensity they initially invest in the platform, the time the site demands, and the relatively young age of its users, perhaps Tumblr’s queer vortex can only be a fleeting and temporally bounded experience for users. It can never engender a lasting commitment. As Rendueles (2017) argued, the model of subjectivity that abounds online propels us to, “see ourselves as clusters of intermittent but intense choices adrift in the reticular circuitry of postmodern globalization” (p. 157). “We are fragments of personal identity,” he continued, “that collide in digital and analog social networks. The price we pay is the destruction of all projects that require a real commitment” (p. 157). Strong, sustained bonds that endure over time are thus incompatible with the nature of online communities. But there are more limitations that restrict the queerly utopic potential of Tumblr.
One of the clearest risks to life in the digital queer vortex is the limited range of opinion and information present and the potential for one to inhabit an echo chamber of ideological homogeneity. Although media audiences have always engaged in “selective exposure,” or the practice of selecting content that reaffirms rather than challenges their ideological positions (Mutz, 2006; Sears & Freedman, 1967; Slater, 2007), the proliferation of the Internet and digital information technologies affords media users increased control over the kinds of information they see. What does it mean that Tumblr users can simply filter out or click off dissent? The threat of an informational vacuum, or what some call a filter bubble (Pariser, 2011), emerged as a dominant theme in my research on Tumblr. It animated the following conversation that occurred during one of the focus groups I held at a college in the American Southeast.
Tomo: I feel like Tumblr can be a very happy place for people if you make it a happy place. Who you follow and what you see on your dashboard is completely controlled by you as the owner of it. But that has the possibility of making you forget that the world around you actually sucks. Cuz I’m just like “Ah Tumblr.” (He smiles and opens his arms as if to embrace something.) “All the gay people.
 

It’s so happy.” And then I’m like, “Oh, I’m in a world of all cis-heads and they all suck.”
Jamie: Yeah. Because you can regulate what you see, you create this bubble where everyone agrees and everything is great.
Caleb: I’m kinda worried about being opposed to viewpoints that oppose our views. That’s something I have a lot of trouble with because when I hear stuff like that I’m like, “No, why would you close yourself off so much. You should be exposed to these kinds of things.” But then I think in the queer tradition, the name of the game has always been making your own family sort of. And so I don’t see a difference on social media. You can make your own family I guess.

During this exchange, the ability of Tumblr to be a “happy place” by virtue of the amount of control one has over their informational environment is extolled, but soon followed by an air of suspicion. There is the fear of “forget- ting” about the outside world, the risk of creating a misleading agreeable bubble, and the potential for disengaging with alternative viewpoints. These are valid concerns, and they may hold true—at least in part—for some users. However, even as the participants in my study were worried about inha- biting a bubble on Tumblr, they ultimately did not, and could not, reside in one in their everyday lives. Again, they look to Tumblr exactly because they reside in a largely heteronormative and cisnormative world. They are inun- dated with information in both their offline and online experiences that runs counter to their sociopolitical sensibilities and cannot systematically circum- vent information that challenges their attitudes. Recent scholarship on Internet users has echoed participants’ experiences, concluding that, although people prefer attitude-confirming information, they are routinely exposed to content that both affirms and challenges their views in digital environments (Jang, 2014; Kahne, Middaugh, Lee, & Feezell, 2011). Moreover, most parti- cipants were reflexive about their activities on Tumblr, knowing full well they were in an environment of general ideological consensus that did not carry
over outside the platform.
Another risk that Tumblr users take in participating in its queer vortex is the potential for encountering the site’s dark underbelly. As Juniper explained, “There are a lot of nasty, dark sides of Tumblr, as there are with any social media platform. There are some really disgusting parts of Tumblr. I’m talking like racist parts, homophobic parts, parts that outright call for the killing of queer people. There is neo-nazi stuff and methodone fan stuff.” Indeed, Tumblr’s permissiveness works both ways, facilitating queer utopias as well as deeply problematic and vile counterparts.
Those same social and technological attributes that create queer vortex- tuality create other kinds of black holes that are equally seductive and can send individuals tumbling into dark worlds. This was the case for Derek, a Black, gender non-conforming, gay man in his last year of college. Derek remembered:
 

Tumblr was a pretty dark place. It’s a place that has a lot of sides. It’s really easy to get sucked into a lot of different kinds of communities. When I started on Tumblr it started off with just me and my friends from high school and their online friends. It was about music and people were pretty queer. But then when I started self-harming [cutting my arms and legs] it was really easy to get drawn into a community that was focused on that. For about a year I fell far into those communities. It was a crazy experience. A good portion of the people I was Tumblr friends with were either dealing with depression or self-harm and things like that. Every post you see on Tumblr tells you where they re-blogged it from and who the source of the post was. Through looking at who they were blogging from and who started the post it was a pretty easy slope to slide down. But I realized I had to stop using Tumblr all together. It’s a media platform that I can’t really have at this time in my life. Maybe in the future it might be a nice place to do a virtual diary or blog but right now probably not.

In fact, the presence of self-harm visibility on Tumblr has become such a problem that the site has included a warning about it in its “Community Guidelines,” stating, “We aim for Tumblr to be a place that facilitates awareness, support, and recovery, and we will remove only those posts or blogs that cross the line into active promotion or glorification of self-harm” (https://www.tumblr.com/policy/en/community).
Finally, the utopic potential of Tumblr is limited by its position within a corporate structure that prioritizes profitability. Tumblr is not queer-owned and operated. It is untethered from grassroots political activism and has no ties to queer advocacy communities. It is indicative of a historic trend in which LGBTQ communities and identities are increasingly “imbricated in consumer culture” and “are equally functions of a liberal discourse of indi- vidual rights, on the one hand, and a capitalistic economic arrangement, on the other” (Chasin, 2000, p. 23, pp. 2–3). The arrangement that weaves together LGBTQ communities and the market delivers mixed results. Even as Tumblr’s spokespeople promise an inclusive and progressive platform, the LGBTQ community is nevertheless vulnerable to potentially adverse corpo- rate paradigms and policies.
In 2013, Yahoo! purchased Tumblr. During the time of the acquisition, amid backlash from Tumblr users skeptical of the deal, Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer famously promised not to “screw it up” (Keitz, 2016). However, soon after, there was a robust push to monetize the company and clean up its reputation. Previously an ad-free environment, Tumblr shortly began to feature advertisements. The platform also began to more aggressively censor its adult and “NSFW” (not suitable for work) content, enraging its users. To the shock of many, that same year, the company censored the terms #gay, #lesbian, and #bisexual on its iOS app. Apple has a strict policy that prohibits adult content on the apps it sells in its online store, and Tumblr complied. Searches for tags such as #gay on Tumblr’s mobile app returned no results. Queer content was essentially rendered invisible. Amid public outcry,
 

Tumblr representatives responded, “The reason you see innocent tags like #gay being blocked on certain platforms is that they are still frequently returning adult content which our entire app was close to being banned for” (https://staff.tumblr.com/post/55906556378/all-weve-heard-from
-a-bunch-of-you-who-are).
In time the problem was fixed, but the same issue would again occur in the summer of 2017 and again coincide with another acquisition. In June of 2017, Verizon purchased Tumblr’s parent company Yahoo! Almost immedi- ately after that, Tumblr introduced a new feature called “safe mode,” which prevented users from seeing adult and NSFW content. Safe mode was made mandatory for all users under 18 years old and became the default setting for new users and for users who are logged out of the site. For users over 18 years old, safe mode can be disabled by making changes in Tumblr’s settings. But as with 2013, safe mode’s algorithm blocked LGBTQ content, branding it as NSFW. Even more, this malfunction happened during Pride Month, which further angered queer users who took to Twitter to express their frustration. “Color me completely unsurprised that Tumblr’s safe mode censors out lgbt content regardless of whether it’s porn or not,” wrote one user (Moreno, 2017). Another proclaimed, “I hate Tumblr now. They’re blocking any lgbtq content for users under 18. What’s the purpose of even doing that?! Let pple express themselves” (Moreno, 2017). Tumblr again issued an apology and has since fixed the problem, but the episode once more underscored the continued vulnerability of LGBTQ users in corpor- atized digital spaces. Indeed, the full effects of Tumblr’s parent company Yahoo! being purchased by Verizon are yet to be determined, and thus Tumblr’s queer potential remains an open question.

Conclusion
As a newer queer cultural archipelago, Tumblr carries the potential to serve as both a utopia and a vortex for young people. I have argued that the online space emerged as a queer center in response to the decline and changing character of historic gay institutions—such as the gayborhood and gay bar— and the migration of queer people online. Young people need a space to interact and a public laboratory to test their identities and become politically motivated. Tumblr offers this space, giving users a glimpse of the queer utopic, the promise of something better, which is largely absent from their everyday lives as well as other digital media platforms.
However, there are serious drawbacks to queer collectivity on Tumblr: the fleeting and noncommittal nature of the interactions afforded, the limits of inhabiting an information environment that mutes dissenting viewpoints, the potential for interfacing with Tumblr’s dark and possibly harmful underbelly, and the vulnerability of queer users on commercialized platforms that prioritize
 

profit over people. Tumblr realistically has no interest in the queer community insofar as it delivers its users as consumers to advertisers. Moreover, as Rendueles (2017) argued, our new digital social matrix has “simply reduced what we expect of social ties” because in online space “a series of discontinuous subjectivities coexist that have no past or future beyond their preferences in the moment” (pp. 72–73). As queer people continue to create communities online, the nature of queer social connection, space and place, and political praxis is changing. At risk is a real and enduring commitment to each other as queer people in the flesh, to historically queer institutions, to common political projects, and to the development of queer public space outside the digital realm.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.


References
Alexander, J., & Losh, E. (2010). “A YouTube of one’s own?”: “Coming out” videos as rhetorical action. In C. Pullen & M. Cooper (Eds.), LGBT identity & online new media (pp. 37–50). New York, NY: Routledge.
Alfonso, F., III (2013, May 23). The real origins of Tumblr. The Daily Dot. Retrieved from https://www.dailydot.com/business/origin-tumblr-anarchaia-projectionist-david-karp/
boyd, D. (2014). It’s complicated: The social lives of networked teens. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Bravmann, S. (1997). Queer fictions of the past: History, culture, and difference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bronski, M. (2011). A queer history of the United States. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Brown, A. (2017). 5 key findings about LGBT Americans. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/06/13/5-key-findings-about-lgbt-americans/ Cavalcante, A. (2016). “I did it all online”: Transgender identity and the management of
everyday life. Critical Studies in Media Communication, 33(1), 109–122. doi:10.1080/ 15295036.2015.1129065
Chasin, A. (2000). Selling out: The gay and lesbian movement goes to market. New York, NY: Palgrave.
Chauncey, G. (1994). Gay New York: Gender, urban culture, and the making of the gay male world, 1890-1940. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Cheshire, T. (2012, February 2). Tumbling on success: How Tumblr’s David Karp built a £500 milllion empire. Wired. Retrieved from http://www.wired.co.uk/article/tumbling-on-success D’ Emilio, J. (1983). Capitalism and gay identity. In A. Snitow, C. Stansell, & S. Thompson (Eds.), Powers of desire: The politics of sexuality (pp. 100–111). New York, NY: Monthly
Review Press.
De Ridder, S., & Van Bauwel, S. (2015). Youth and intimate media cultures: Gender, sexuality, relationships, and desire as storytelling practices in social networking sites. Communications: the European Journal of Communication Research, 40(3), 319–340. doi:10.1515/commun-2015-0012
Dickel, S., & Schrape, J. (2017). The logic of digital utopianism. Nanoethics, 11(47), 47–58. doi:10.1007/s11569-017-0285-6
 

Doan, P. (2015). Why plan for the LGBTQ community. In P. L. Doan (Ed.), Planning and LGBTQ communities: The need for inclusive queer spaces (pp. 1–15). New York, NY: Routledge.
Faderman, L. (1991). Odd girls and twilight lovers: A history of lesbian life in twentieth century America. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. Retrieved from
Fink, M., & Miller, Q. (2014). Trans media moments: Tumblr, 2011–2013. Television & New Media, 15(7), 611–626. doi:10.1177/1527476413505002
Fox, J., & Ralston, R. (2016). Queer identity online: Informal learning and teaching experi- ences of LGBTQ individuals on social media. Computers in Human Behavior, 65, 635–642. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.06.009
Garber, E. (1989). A spectacle in color: The lesbian and gay subculture of jazz age Harlem. In
M. Duberman, M. Vicinus, & G. Chauncey Jr. (Eds.), Hidden from history: Reclaiming the gay and lesbian past (pp. 318–331). New York, NY: New American Library.
Ghaziani, A. (2014). There goes the gayborhood? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Gross, L. (2003). The gay global village in cyberspace. In N. Couldry & J. Curran (Eds.),
Contesting media power: Alternative media in a networked world (pp. 259–272). New York, NY: Rowman and Littlefield.
Gudelunas, D. (2012). There’s an app for that: The uses and gratifications of online social networks for gay men. Sexuality & Culture, 16, 347–365. Retrieved from https://link. springer.com/article/10.1007/s12119-012-9127-4
Halperin, D. (1995). Saint foucault: Towards a gay hagiography. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hanhardt, C. B. (2013). Safe space: Gay neighborhood history and the politics of violence. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Jang, S. M. (2014). Challenges to selective exposure: Selective seeking and avoidance in a multitasking media environment. Mass Communication and Society, 17, 665–688. doi:10.1080/15205436.2013.835425
Jones, A. (2013). Introduction: Queer utopias, queer futurity, and potentiality in quotidian practice. In A. Jones (Ed.), A critical inquiry into queer utopias (pp. 1–17). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kahne, J., Middaugh, E., Lee, N., & Feezell, J. T. (2011). Youth online activity and exposure to diverse perspectives. New Media & Society, 14(3), 492–512. doi:10.1177/1461444811420271 Keitz, A. (2016, July 19). Goodbye, Tumblr; Yahoo! hardly knew ye. The Street. Retrieved from
https://www.thestreet.com/story/13645150/1/goodbye-tumblr-yahoo-hardly-knew-ye.html Kennedy, E. L., & Davis, M. D. (1993). Boots of leather, slippers of gold: The history of a lesbian
community. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Levitas, R. (2007). Looking for the blue: The necessity of utopia. Journal of Political Ideologies, 12(3), 289–306. doi:10.1080/13569310701622184
Meeker, M. (2005). Contacts desired: Gay and lesbian communications and community, 1940s- 1970s. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Miller, B. (2015). “They’re the modern day gay bar”: Exploring the uses and gratifications of social networks for men who have sex with men. Computers in Human Behavior, 51, 476–482. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.05.023
Moreno, D. (2017, June 24). Tumblr fixes problems with safe mode feature that hid LGBTQ posts. Towleroad. Retrieved from http://www.towleroad.com/2017/06/tumblr-safe-mode/ Muñoz, J. E. (2009). Cruising utopia: The then and there of queer futurity. New York, NY:
New York University Press.
Mutz, D. C. (2006). Hearing the other side: Deliberative versus participatory democracy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the internet is hiding from you. London, UK: Penguin Books.
 

Rendueles, C. (2017). Sociophobia: Political change in the digital utopia. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Renninger, B. (2015). “Where I can be myself … where I can speak my mind”: Networked counterpublics in a polymedia environment. New Media & Society, 17(9), 1513–1529. doi:10.1177/1461444814530095
Rosser, B. R. S., West, W., & Weinmeyer, R. (2008). Are gay communities dying or just in transition? Results from an international consultation examining possible structural change in gay communities. AIDS Care: Psychological and Socio-Medical Aspects of AIDS/HIV, 20, 588–595. doi:10.1080/09540120701867156
Sargent, L. T. (2010). Utopianism: A very short introduction. Oxford, UK: Oxford UniversityPress.
Sears, D. O., & Freedman, J. L. (1967). Selective exposure to information: A critical review.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 31, 194–213. doi:10.1086/267513
Selvick, S. (2014). Androgynous social media and visual culture. In C. Pullen (Ed.), Queer youth and media cultures (pp. 170–181). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sender, K. (2007). Dualcasting: Bravo’s gay programming and the quest for women audi- ences. In C. Chris & A. Freitas (Eds.), Cable visions: Television beyond broadcasting (pp. 302–318). New York, NY: New York University Press.
Slater, M. D. (2007). Reinforcing spirals: The mutual influence of media selectivity and media effects and their impact on individual behavior and social identity. Communication Theory, 17, 281–303. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.2007.00296.x
Statista. (2016). Distribution of Tumblr Users in the United States as of December 2016, by age group. Author. Retrieved from distribution-of-tumblr-users-in-the-united-states/
Steele, S. (2013). Performing utopia: Queer counterpublics and southerners on new ground. In A. Jones (Ed.), A critical inquiry into queer utopias (pp. 131–148). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Visser, G. (2015). Thinking beyond exclusionary gay male spatial frames in the developing world. In P. L. Doan (Ed.), Planning and LGBTQ communities: The need for inclusive queer spaces (pp. 81–93). New York, NY: Routledge.
Vivienne, S., & Burgess, J. (2012). The digital storyteller’s stage: Queer everyday activists negotiating privacy and publicness. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 56(3), 362–377. doi:10.1080/08838151.2012.705194
Walters, S. D. (2014). The tolerance trap: How god, genes, & good intentions are sabotaging gay equality. New York, NY: New York University Press.
Warner, M. (1999). The trouble with normal: Sex, politics, and the ethics of queer life. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Warner, M. (2002). Publics and counterpublics. Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books.
Welch, L. (2011). David Karp, the nonconformist who built Tumblr. Inc.com. Retrieved from https://www.inc.com/magazine/201106/the-way-i-work-david-karp-of-tumblr.html
Weston, K. (1995). Get thee to a big city: Sexual imaginary and the great gay migration. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 2, 253–277. doi:10.1215/10642684-2-3-253
Whannel, G. (2010). News, celebrity, and vortextuality: A study of the media coverage of the Michael Jackson verdict. Cultural Politics, 6(1), 65–84. doi:10.2752/ 175174310X12549254318782
